

salt lake city -- another american teen-ager is wearing the
olympic gold medal that was supposed to belong to michelle kwan.
sarah hughes kisses her gold medal after pulling off one of the biggest upsets in olympic figure skating history.

	   sound familiar?

	   sarah hughes, with the performance of her young life, soared
from fourth place to win the free skate and the title thursday
night in one of the biggest upsets in olympic figure skating
history.

	   while hughes played the same role as tara lipinski four years
ago, kwan made two major mistakes to fall to third, behind russian
irina slutskaya, who won the silver medal.

	   "i skated for pure enjoyment," the 16-year-old hughes said.
"that's how i wanted my olympic moment to be."

	   it was a moment that stunned nearly everyone -- including the new
yorker who was sitting in the dressing room when kwan and slutskaya
fell off the top spot in the podium with ordinary programs.

	   "i think a lot of people counted me out and didn't think i
could do it," hughes said. "i didn't even think it would be
possible, so just to be sitting here with this medal around my
neck, i didn't think it could happen."

	   when the final marks were announced, her coach, robin wagner,
dragged hughes off a bench onto the floor as both women screamed
and tears began flowing.

	   "we were both so shocked, because it wasn't even on the radar
screen," wagner said.

	   hughes is a year older than lipinski was at the nagano games.
she also was a much longer shot to win because lipinski owned a
world title in 1998. hughes' best was a bronze at last year's world
championships.






how hughes won





the short program is worth one-third and the free program is
worth two-thirds of the total score. based on the nine judges
marks, the skaters get a factored placement for each program. the
lowest total of the two factored placements determines the overall
winner. in case of a tie, the skater with lower free program score
is the winner.

	   the scores after the short program were:

1. kwan -- 0.5
2. slutskaya -- 1.0
3. cohen -- 1.5
4. hughes -- 2.0

	   in the free program, factors are 1.0 for first, 2.0 for second,
3.0 for third based on their postion.

	   the factored placements of the free program were:

1. hughes --1.0
2. slutskaya -- 2.0
3. kwan -- 3.0

	   the total factored placements were:

1. hughes --3.0
2. slutskaya -- 3.0
3. kwan -- 3.5

	   hughes and slutskaya finshed with 3.0 factored placements after
both programs. by virtue of the 1.0 factored placement in the free
program, hughes wins the gold.-- the associated press-- the associated press



	   and kwan is a far more accomplished skater now, with four world
and six u.s. titles.

	   "i think i was a little more disappointed in nagano, just
because i skated much better," kwan said. "tonight it was one of
those things. i don't know what didn't go my way."

	   kwan lost again because a skater's final total is reached by
adding "factored placements" for both the short and long
programs. until slutskaya skated, kwan's combined score would have
been enough to beat hughes.

	   but slutskaya's performance in the free skate earned her second
and pushed kwan into third.

	   "i have experienced so much the last four years," kwan said,
"and i realized it doesn't matter the color of medal."

	   but then she showed off a plastic gold medal she was given by
1976 gold medalist dorothy hamill.

	   "i know it's not as heavy as this one," she said, comparing
hamill's gift to the real thing. then looking at the elusive gold,
she added, "this is the color of medal i would have liked."

that color belonged to hughes, but it easily could have been
slutskaya's. she's now finished ahead of kwan in seven of their
last nine meetings, but she was too conservative as the final
skater.

	   slutskaya didn't bother with any triple-triple combinations that
have become her trademark. she had a sloppy landing on a triple
flip and her program lacked fire.

	   still, she appeared stunned and angry she didn't win. the
difference was a tiebreaker with the judge from finland, who gave
hughes the edge in artistry.

	   she was more composed after the medals ceremony.

	   "i fight with my nerves and i skate good," slutskaya said,
"and i was so surprised after my free skating about my second
marks. it's very interesting, every year i have good first marks
and down second marks.

	   "but it is sport, but really a shame."

	   hughes showed none of the tension of her short program,
rollicking through seven triple jumps, five in combination -- more
difficult than the ones kwan and slutskaya attempted. wagner leapt
as high as her student after hughes nailed a huge triple toe
loop-triple loop combo.

	   the smile on hughes' face grew along with the crowd's din, and
she nearly doubled over in joy when she finished a captivating
program. wagner, meanwhile, practically jumped over the sideboards
to hug the youngster, who responded magnificently in the biggest
moment of her life.

	   "it's a good thing i am not taller," wagner said. "otherwise,
i would have had a problem."

	   the problems for the 21-year-old kwan came early. she two-footed
a triple toe loop in combination and fell on a triple flip.

	   as she awaited her marks, kwan sat holding the hand of her
father, danny. kwan split with longtime coach frank carroll last
october, so he wasn't anywhere nearby.

	   it was eerily reminiscent of how she lost to lipinski.

	   "it's a bummer, but it is competition," she said. "i just had
to remind myself, 'it's ok. it's ok."'

	   nerves seemed to get to hughes on tuesday night in the short
program. but once she hit the ice thursday and landed her first
combination, she was flying to heights few predicted when she
finished third at nationals last month behind kwan and sasha cohen.

	   cohen was fourth here.

	   "i didn't want to skate for a gold medal," hughes said. "i
went out and had a great time. i said, 'this is the olympics. i
want to do the best."'

	   and she is the best, a spot kwan and slutskaya had in their
grasp.

	   nor was it meant to be for cohen, who was third after the short
program. the precocious 17-year-old two-footed a triple lutz and
fell on a triple toe. her routine lacked footwork, as well, and she
seemed to realize her medal chances were gone as soon as she left
the ice.

	   hughes is the seventh american, third in the last four games --
and the most unexpected of all -- to skate off with olympic gold.






alpine skiing
freestyle skiing

bobsled/luge/skeleton
ice hockey

cross country/biathlon
ski jumping/nordic combined

curling
speedskating/short track

figure skating
snowboarding



